Baskets is an American comedy-drama television series that premiered on January 21, 2016 on FX.[2] The series was co-created by Louis C.K., Zach Galifianakis and Jonathan Krisel; Krisel is also the showrunner and director. Galifianakis stars in the dual lead role as Chip Baskets, a failed professional clown in Paris, who instead becomes a local rodeo clown in Bakersfield, California, and his identical twin brother, Dale Baskets. Galifianakis, C.K., M. Blair Breard, Dave Becky, Marc Gurvitz and Andrea Pett-Joseph serve as executive producers, with FX Productions as the production company.[3] In 2017 C.K.'s production company Pig Newton had all ties to the show and FX cut after C.K. admitted to sexual misconduct with five women.[4] On May 24, 2018, FX renewed the show for a fourth and final season, which premiered on June 13, 2019.[5][6] The series ended on August 22, 2019.[7]
Chip Baskets aims to become a professional clown. After failing to get a degree at a prestigious clowning school in Paris, he is stuck with a job at a local rodeo in his hometown of Bakersfield, California.
In December 2013, Louis C.K.'s production company, Pig Newton, signed a deal with FX for him to create new shows for their various networks. FX ordered a pilot episode for Baskets with C.K. and Galifianakis to co-write, and Galifianakis to star.[9] On August 27, 2014, FX picked up the show for a 10-episode first season with production to commence in 2015.[3]

In November 2017, after Louis C.K. confirmed the sexual misconduct allegations against him were true, FX canceled their overall deal with C.K. and his production company, Pig Newton. C.K. would have no involvement in future seasons of the series.[10]

Baskets incorporated several ideas Galifianakis originally came up with for Between Two Ferns: The Movie but were discarded early in the film's development.[11]
Baskets has received positive reviews from critics. Rotten Tomatoes gives the first season 70% with an average score of 7.4 out of 10, based on 36 reviews. The site's consensus reads, "Though its themes may be unpleasant for some and LOL moments are few and far between, Baskets succeeds on the strength of its deadpan delivery and terrific cast."[52] On Metacritic, the first season holds a score of 68 out of 100, based on 32 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[53]
Christine announces that they'll make a TV commercial for the rodeo but Dale (who has experience making lame ads for Baskets Career College) returns to his usual pissy self when Christine says that Ken will run the project due to his own TV experience. The filming doesn't go well with mistakes and Ken ultimately tires of Dale's disrespect and ridicule of Christine and slaps him, sending Dale into hysterics. Dale loses his mind and announces he's leaving town, and Ken and Christine have a tense farewell that leaves their relationship in doubt, before Christine finishes the TV commercial herself.