The anonymous narrator ( Edward Norton ) works for a car company in a location that requires a lot of travel and suffers from  insomnia . One day, he attends a group psychotherapy meeting for men with testicular cancer, where they believe he is also ill, and spontaneously cries in the arms of another man, finding a "freedom" that soothes his insomnia. He begins to become addicted to participating in group psychotherapy groups of various kinds, without revealing that he does not suffer from what they suffer. However, he begins to notice that there is another swindler, Marla Singer ( Elena Bonham Carter), whose presence destroys his calm, so he negotiates with her to avoid meeting them in the same groups.

After a flight, where he returns from a business trip, the narrator finds his apartment demolished by an explosion. He calls Tyler Durden ( Brad Pitt ), a soap seller with whom he had talked on the plane, and meets him at a bar. A discussion about consumerism  leads Tyler to invite the narrator to stay at his house, and the narrator later moves permanently to Tyler's dilapidated house. Outside the bar, Tyler asks the narrator to hit him, which leads them to start a fight. As this goes on for several nights, it attracts a lot of men. Along the way, they continue the fight in the basement of the bar, where the "fight club" is finally set up.

Marla takes an overdose of pills and calls the narrator for help, he ignores her, but Tyler answers the phone and saves her. Tyler and Marla start having sex and Tyler warns the narrator never to talk to Marla about him. In the city, many fight clubs began to form and with Tyler's headquarters, they became an anti-materialist and anti-corporate operation called "Project Massacre". The narrator complains to Tyler that he wants to be more involved in the business, but Tyler suddenly disappears. When a member of Project Massacre is killed by police during a ill-conceived sabotage, the narrator tries to stop the project, following in the footsteps of Tyler from his international travels to locate him. In one city, a member of the Project greets the narrator by the name of Tyler Durden. The narrator calls Marla from his hotel room and discovers that Marla also thinks he is Tyler. Suddenly, he sees Tyler in the room and he reveals to him how he is two people sharing the same body. When the narrator thought he was asleep, Tyler was actually controlling his body.

The narrator faints after the discussion. When he wakes up, he discovers that Tyler had made phone calls while he was unconscious. Reveals Tyler's plans to write off debts by destroying buildings containing credit card documents. The narrator tries to contact the police but learns that the police are also members of the Project. He tries to detonate the explosives in a building, but Tyler takes him to the top floor. The narrator is marked with a gun by Tyler but realizes that since they share the same body, the gun is in his hand. He presses the trigger in his mouth, where he shoots his cheek but does not die. Tyler collapses with a wound on the back of his head. Later, some members of Project Massacre bring Marla, which they have kidnapped, believing him to be Tyler, and leaving them alone. The explosives are detonated, destroying the buildings around them. The narrator and Marla, holding each other's hand, look out the window.
