The film begins in 1939 with the repatriation of Polish Jews to the Krakow Ghetto shortly after the outbreak of World War II . Meanwhile, Oscar Schindler, a German businessman from Moravia , arrives in the city hoping to make a fortune from the war. Schindler bribes the Wehrmacht and SS officers and buys a factory to produce army supplies. Unaware of how to run a business, he hires Isaac Stern, an employee of the Jewish Council, who has contacts with Jewish businessmen andblacksmiths inside the ghetto. Jewish businessmen lend Schindler money for the factory in exchange for a percentage of the profits. Schindler only hires Jews as they cost less as their salaries go to the SS. Schindler's workers are allowed outside the ghetto, and Stern falsifies documents to ensure that as many people as possible are "useful" to the Germans in order to save them from being transferred to concentration camps and to death.

SS Lieutenant Amon Get arrives in Krakow to begin construction of the Plachov concentration camp. Instructs to evacuate ghetto and Operation Reinhard in Krakowbegins, with hundreds of troops emptying crowded rooms and killing anyone protesting or not cooperating, elderly or child. Schindler watches the massacre from afar and is deeply affected. Nevertheless, he became friends with Geth and continued to have the support and protection of the SS. Schindler bribes Geth to allow him to build a camp for his workers. Initially his intentions are to make money but in the process he starts ordering Stern to save as many lives as he can. As the war takes another turn, an order from Berlin forces Geth to destroy all the bodies of the murdered Jews, dismantle the Plastsov ghetto, and send the remaining Jews toAuschwitz concentration camp .

At first, Schindler prepares to leave Krakow, but can not do so and asks Get to allow him to keep his workers to transport them to his hometown of Moravia away from the Final Solution . Gett accepts but charges a very high price for each individual worker. Schindler and Stern compile a list of workers who will not be transferred to Auschwitz .

The "Schindler's List" consists of "capable" inmates, and for many in the Plaschov camp, having their name on the list is very important because it can lead to their life or death. Almost everyone on the list arrives in Moravia. The train carrying the women accidentally goes to Auschwitz. The women think they are being led to the gas chamber but they start crying with joy when water falls from the showers. Schindler immediately goes to Auschwitz and bribes the camp manager to save all the women on his list. As soon as they arrive in Moravia, Schindler gives strict orders to the SS guards not to shoot or torture anyone. To keep his workers alive, he spends almost all of his fortune to bribe the Nazisofficers. His money runs out shortly before the Wehrmacht surrenders and the war in Europe ends .

As a Nazi member and a lucrative slave, in 1945 Schindler had to escape. Although the SS guards have been ordered to exterminate the Jews, Schindler persuades them to return to their families as men and not as murderers. Shortly before leaving, he loads his car and bids farewell to his workers. They give him a letter explaining that he is not a war criminal along with a ring with the inscription "Whoever saves a life, saves the whole world". Schindler is both moved and ashamed, feeling that he could do more to save more lives.

Schindler's Jews, having slept outside the factory gates, wake up in the morning and a Soviet Dragon arrives and tells them that they have been liberated by the Red Army . The Jews walk to the next town to find food.

After some scenes depicting some events after the end of the war, such as the execution of Amon Gett for war crimes and what finally happened to Schindler, the film returns with the Jews walking to the neighboring city. As they walk, the film fills with colors and shows Schindler's tomb in Jerusalem . The film ends with the now older real Jews who worked at Schindler's factory going hand in hand with the actors who played them and each leaving a stone in their grave - a Jewish custom that shows deep gratitude. In the last scene, Liam Neeson , although we do not see his face, leaves a rose.
